Hello and welcome back.
So in the last lesson we learned a little bit about this Gatsby's source file system plug in so plug
ins are pretty much these tools that we can include inside of our Gatsby config in order for our Gatsby
processes to get these bonus features.
So for example our source file system as we know gave us access to that all file query inside of our
graph Q all queries on our Web.
Now the next thing that we need to add is actually going to be a new plug in that is called a transformer
that transformer will allow us to take these files that we are pulling into our query using the all
file query that gives us a no representation but we actually want the data that sits inside of those
files.
So we need a transformer to do that.
The thing that we have to note though is that Transformers tend to be libraries that we need to install
inside of our project.
Now if you look inside of your directory you might see a yarn log file if you see a yarn log file.
It means that by default this project comes with yarn.
If you see a package LOC file then you actually don't have yarn installed.
Instead what you're using is just NPM what we're going to do is we're just going to add this new file
and depending on what you have whether it's yarn or NPM just use the respective one in order for you
to add a new file in NPM.
You do npm install and then you type the name of the file or the side of the package that we're adding
If you're using yarn you're just gonna do yarn add and then the name of the package that we're adding.
Now the name of the package is Gatsby transformer remark so simply add that in with your respective
package manager depending on how your folder structure looks and what this will do is this will add
in this new transformer object that we need to plug into our application.
So you simply add these back six here and you type in Gatsby transformer.
Now what Gatsby transformer remark does is it is a plug in that allows us to convert our markdown files
into data and HDMI out the front matter portion of our markdown will get converted into a data object
that we can access and everything in the actual markdown itself will be converted into HCM Mel that
we can use to build the pages that we want inside of our application.
Now keeping this in mind the other thing we have to do is remember to restart our server because we've
added a new plug in in order for us to actually access what we're going to see with our transformer
Mark is that once this server finishes rebuilding we get access to this new query inside of our graph.
Q Well so let's just wait until this finishes building and we'll go back to our graph QoL and we'll
refresh.
Now what we'll see is this thing called all markdown remark.
So if we add this and we simply fire this off we see that now we only get two notes.
The reason for this is because these are actually our markdown nodes.
So in order for us to see inside of the node itself here we have our front matter where we have an optional
description title and the date as well as this HCM Al block which represents the actual body of the
markdown that we've written.
So we try this again here we see that the HDMI holds the markdown but now converted into HD CML as well
as our front matter object that holds our description are title on our date.
Now description of course is optional.
That's why in some places we get null because we don't include one.
So we just have to account for this when we actually build out our blog template.
Now another property that we see that we have is this excerpt now the excerpt unlike the HD a mouth
is what will give us this little snippet of what we're trying to show.
So this is pretty much the body of our markdown except it truncate it automatically for us.
Now this is really good when we want to actually show or highlight something inside of our blog preview
for example where we don't want to show the full body but maybe just an excerpt from the top of it.
So we want to use this property inside of our index page for example where we actually list out our
blocks.
So what we're going to do is exactly that Next we're gonna go to our index page and what we're going
to do is we are going to bring in the graph QoL query so that we can actually start requesting for that
data that we just wrote inside of our graph.
Q Well so what we want to do is we want to copy this graph all.
And then after where we export out our actual index page we want to make sure that what we export is
a query.
So we're just gonna export cost query which is equal to this graph.
You all request an inside we're gonna say it's a query and then we're going to copy over this object
that we wrote before.
Now Gatsby is smart enough to know that if you export out some thing that has this graph q l almost
body to it that this is probably a query that you want to use and pass into whatever component you're
exporting out by default.
Now we still have to export out our component by default and if we want to make this a bit more clear
we don't have to export it like this.
We can just copy our export default text and replace this index page like so.
So by default we're just automatically exporting out our function that represents the actual component
that we render render for our index page.
And now what we're gonna do is we're gonna get in that props object and on that prompts object will
be the data object that is our query return.
So using that data we're going to now end up creating some kind of default.
Look to our index page that shows us our list of blog posts.
So what we're gonna do is we are just going to make sure that there is a div here we can actually keep
this SCA at the top.
It doesn't really matter and inside of this div we are going to have an H1 and in this H1 we're just
going to say e was thoughts.
Now we do also actually want the total count of our blog posts.
So our how to do that.
Let's actually first remove this.
And what we're gonna do is we're going to add a new property to our all markdown remark called Total
count.
Now this actually exists right here on r all markdown remark as a property called Total count.
And as you'll see what we'll get is the number of nodes that exist inside of this markdown remark.
So by doing this we're now able to access it inside of our data object.
So we're just gonna make an H for that says a javascript interpolation of data dot all markdown remark
dot total count and now if we save and we go back to our actual application
we see that we have our count here.
Now let's actually log out the data to see what else we have access to before we continue because the
shape is actually going to represent the query.
But let's just make sure it doesn't hurt to always double check.
Now if we open up our console we'll see this object that represents our data on it we see our all marked
down remark and inside of it our edges inside of our edges array is each element that has our no property.
And then on the Node property has those fields that we requested in our query.
So as we can see the object that we get back resembles the exact shape of the object that we passed
into our graph.
You all query.
So this format matches exactly this format so that's really great for us because now we know roughly
what it is that we need to use on this element in order to actually build out our blog previews.
So what we're going to do is we are going to make a another javascript tag and we're gonna say data
dot all markdown remark dot edges dot map.
So we want to map over each edge and on each edge we want the node object that we saw.
So each of these and what we're going to do is we are going to return back a div where the key is equal
to the node.
And then inside of each div we're going to have a title.
So let's just use an H2 for now.
And what will render right here is our node dot front matter.
Actually this might be lower cased all dot title and we'll ask gonna put a tab here that also loads
the date
I just have an H to let's use a span just so that it's not too big and then after we have this span
we are also going to put a p tag and in the p tag is where we'll put our excerpt.
Now if we save we go back we see that our blog data is showing up so it's not solved yet but so far
it's all perfectly fine.
So that's one of the great things about Gatsby is that by leveraging the flow that Gatsby expects us
to use as well as tinkering around with some of the code we're now able to pull in our markdown files
as the data that we use to actually populate this index page.
So there's a great because whenever we add new markdown files now to that markdown pages folder we will
automatically be able to pull it into our index j ust with our graph Q all query.
And as you would expect our data would simply just populate out and give us new blog samples inside
of this index without us ever having to modify that code.
So this is really great.
Now in the next lesson we're actually going to build out these blog post pages individually because
right now we can't link to them.
We're simply displaying it in our index.
So let's do that in the next lesson.